feat: Add LIP-29. Community Staking Module v2 (#78)
lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals: LIPS/lip-29.md

---
lip: 29
title: Community Staking Module v2
status: Proposed
author: Dmitry Gusakov, Sergey Khomutinin, Dmitry Chernukhin, Vladimir Gorkavenko
discussions-to: https://research.lido.fi/t/community-staking-module/5917
created: 2025-05-02
updated: 2025-05-02
---

# LIP-29. Community Staking Module v2

## Simple Summary

Community Staking Module (CSM) v2 is an evolutionary step in the CSM development. The main features of CSM v2 consist of support for different Node Operator types, improvements in the performance assessment mechanisms, [EIP-7002](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7002) support, and much more. Detailed description of the features can be found in a [separate document](https://hackmd.io/@lido/csm-v2-tech) that will be referred to later in the text. This document describes the overall CSM v2 architecture and changes made compared to the existing [CSM v1](https://github.com/lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals/blob/develop/LIPS/lip-26.md).

## Motivation

> The current version of the Community Staking Module (CSM) is a great step towards the decentralization of Lido on Ethereum. It allows Node Operators to join Lido on Ethereum protocol permissionlessly and benefit from the outstanding Node Operator rewards. However, there are still some limitations and challenges that need to be addressed to make CSM more robust, flexible, and competitive. One of the main challenges is the need to support different types of Node Operators, such as anonymous permissionless operators and identified community stakers. This requires a more sophisticated architecture that can accommodate different types of Node Operators and specific parameters for each.

Reviewer: distinguishing anon permissionless operators and identified community stakers was possible already in CSM 1.0 though via the EA module; 

maybe mention more `professional` or `seasoned` operators moving beyond starter setups to somewhat more industrial

Reviewer: just thinking aloud that the movitation part needs to have more color about unlocking new use-cases

Author: Updated according to the comments

##### `PermissionlessGate.sol`
*PermissionlessGate on the scheme*

> New in v2

`PermissionlessGate.sol` is a supplementary contract that enables permissionless Node Operator creation in `CSModule.sol`, serving as an entry point.

##### `VettedGate.sol`
*VettedGates on the scheme*

> New in v2

`VettedGate.sol` is a supplementary contract that enables Node Operator creation for the vetted addresses, which serves as an entry point to `CSModule.sol`. Alongside Node Operator creation, a contract can assign a custom Node Operator type (bondCurveId) in `CSAccounting.sol`. Deployed using `VettedGateFactory.sol` to allow the addition of the new instances later without additional code security audits. The list of the vetted participants is upgradable for each instance of the `VettedGate.sol` individually.

##### `CSEjector.sol`
*Ejector on the scheme*

> New in v2

> `CSEjector.sol` is a supplementary contract responsible for interactions with EIP-7002-powered Lido Withdrawal credentials via `VEB`. Node Operators can voluntarily eject their validators. `CSStrikes.sol` uses `CSEjector.sol` to trigger exits for validators that have surpassed the strike threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CSEjector.sol` is a supplementary contract responsible for interactions with EIP-7002-powered Lido Withdrawal credentials via `ValidatorExitBusOracle` (`VEBO`). Node Operators can voluntarily eject their validators. `CSStrikes.sol` uses `CSEjector.sol` to trigger exits for validators that have surpassed the strike threshold.
```

Author: VEB is a new name for VEBO. @avsetsin can share more details on that
